# Framework

In this file we provide some background information about how this codebase generates the correaid.nl website.
The website is built using [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and based on the [Vonge Template](https://jazzed-kale.cloudvent.net/) theme.

## Approach

Our original website was made by forking the main CorrelAid website made using [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/).
This was a quick way to get a website up and running with a familiar look and feel.
In 2022, we decided to reboot the website.
With the existing codebase being somewhat messy, we decided to start again from scratch.
The choice to use Jekyll, rather than Hugo, was motivated by its built-in support for website hosting via GitHub.
Unfortunately it turns out that our choice of template includes some packages that GitHub Pages does not support.
The list of packages can be found [here](https://pages.github.com/versions.json). 
The naming of this page is unhelpful, but for things to work automatically, don't use something not on this list.
At the time of writing, they also do not have a meaningful build error message when using an unsupported package.
Fortunately there is a way around this which will be explained below.
The sharper reader may now realise that the original rationale for using Jekyll is somewhat undermined by this issue.

## How It Works

Our website is hosted with [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/).
It allows us to host a website for free for our [GitHub organisation](https://github.com/CorrelAidxNL).
A special [.io repo](https://github.com/CorrelAidxNL/CorrelAidxNL.github.io) is made.
This creates our [github.io](https://CorrelAidxNL.github.io) website.
As owners of the [CorrelAid.nl](https://www.correlaid.nl) domain, we can make this appear at our preferred URL.

This repo holds the code base for generating the website and is where we make changes to it.
It follows a familiar CI/CD framework.
The idea that any commits to the master branch will trigger a redeployment of the website.
I deliberately say _redeployment_ here rather than _rebuild_ because we need to build the website locally ourselves.

As mentioned in the intro, the website is made using Jekyll.
This is a static website generator.
Rather than having to code HTML explicitly or have them generated by the server on the fly,
this approach allows us to work with templates, but all pages are generated upfront when building and deploying.
We are using a free Jekyll template made by [Cloud Cannon](https://cloudcannon.com/).
However, we are not using their interface or services to maintain the website.

## Repo Contents

In this list we just highlight the important sub-folders and files, rather than being comprehensive.
- components. Contains the code used to generate and style reusable website elements.
- docs. Destination for the final build of the website, 
  i.e. where GitHub picks up the built website for deployment via GitHub Pages.
  GitHub doesn't allow you to pick a custom name for this _deployment_ folder, 
  otherwise this folder would have a more meaningful and less confusing name.
- documentation. Where documentation (like this) at the level below the main repo readme live.
  The unfortunate forced naming convention from GitHub is why we have _docs_ and _documentation_.
- site. The folder containing the website content.
  When just updating the website, i.e. not doing genuine dev work, this is the only folder where you need to edit files.
  - _data. Various setting yml files.
  - _includes. HTML files defining website page elements.
  - _layouts. HTML files defining standard page templates.
  - _site. Where the local website _build_ lives when using the `jekyll serve` command to test changes locally.
  - collections. The main folder with the website content.
  Here the subfolders define various collections of different types of content that are used to build the website.
  - images. Where all images are saved.
  - _config.yml. The main website configuration file.
  - favicon.ico. CA NL logo that appears in browser tabs and URL (search) bar.

## How We Build The Website

For building the website, there are two basic commands. 
The `serve` command makes a build of the website and serves it so that it can be accessed via localhost.
All internal links are made to point to this localhost version of the website, so that you can test it locally.
The `build` command makes a build of the website which uses the actual website URL for internal links.
This build is thus suitable for deployment on the server (unlike the local test version _built_ via `serve`).

## Collections

When adding content to the website, typically you will only need to change content in the '/site/collections' folder,
whilst adding any new images to the 'site/images' folder.

Website pages are made in one of two ways. Either they are explicitly listed in the _pages_ collection 
or they are auto-generated based on the content of the other collections.
In the latter case, it should be straight-forward to add a new page by adding a new entry to the relevant collection.
Note that if you are wanting to make a genuinely new page in the _pages_ collection,
you need to also think about how the user will be able to navigate to that page, 
as it will not be linked to / added to the navigation bar automatically.

Currently, the content of our website falls into four main categories.
- **Pages**. Here we define custom pages specifically, e.g. the about page.
  When adding a new page, its inclusion in the overall website navigation (to make it findable) needs to be implemented.
  For this reason, adding a page is somewhat more involved than adding other type of content.
  NB: many pages are created automatically on-the-fly when adding other types of content.
- **Projects**. Project posts are meant to be short standardised descriptions of our projects.
  Adding a project will include it in our Project page (and also initially on our homepage)
  and create a new page for the project.
  Note that longer in-depth posts about projects should be done as a Post in addition to a shorter Project (post).
  The idea of this content section is to have a short description of every project.
- **Posts**. Posts are rather free-form and can be on any topic.
  A typical blog post could be a deep dive into a project or a personal CorrelAid NL journey of a volunteer.
  Adding a (blog) post will include it on our Blog page (and also initially on our homepage)
  and create a new page for the post.
- **People**. For each CA NL volunteer, we can make an md file containing their bio (and link to an image).
  The code base then automatically uses the details in these files to add their profiles to the website.
